Changelog for Falcon 3.1.2
==========================

Summary
-------

This is a minor point release fixing a couple of high impact bugs,
as well as publishing binary wheels for the recently released CPython 3.12.


Changes to Supported Platforms
------------------------------

- Falcon is now supported (including binary wheels) on CPython 3.12.
  A couple of remaining stdlib deprecations from 3.11 and 3.12 will be
  addressed in Falcon 4.0.
- As with the previous release, Python 3.5 & 3.6 remain deprecated and
  will no longer be supported in Falcon 4.0.
- EOL Python 3.7 will no longer be actively supported in 4.0, but the framework
  should still continue to install from source. We may remove the support for
  3.7 altogether later in the 4.x series if we are faced with incompatible
  ecosystem changes in typing, Cython, etc.


Fixed
-----

- Some essential files were unintentionally omitted from the source distribution
  archive, rendering it unsuitable to run the test suite off.
  This has been fixed, and the ``sdist`` tarball should now be usable as a base
  for packaging Falcon in OS distributions. (`#2051 <https://github.com/falconry/falcon/issues/2051>`__)
- :ref:`WebSocket <ws>` implementation has been fixed to properly handle
  :class:`~falcon.HTTPError` and :class:`~falcon.HTTPStatus` exceptions raised by
  custom :func:`error handlers <falcon.asgi.App.add_error_handler>`.
  The WebSocket connection is now correctly closed with an appropriate code
  instead of bubbling up an unhandled error to the application server. (`#2146 <https://github.com/falconry/falcon/issues/2146>`__)
- Falcon's :class:`~falcon.testing.TestClient` mimics the behavior of real WSGI
  servers (and the WSGI spec) by presenting the ``PATH_INFO`` CGI variable
  already in the percent-decoded form. However, the client also used to
  indiscriminately set the non-standard ``RAW_URI`` CGI variable to ``/``, which
  made writing tests for apps :ref:`decoding raw URL path <raw_url_path_recipe>`
  cumbersome. This has been fixed, and the raw path of a simulated request is now
  preserved in ``RAW_URI``. (`#2157 <https://github.com/falconry/falcon/issues/2157>`__)


Contributors to this Release
----------------------------

Many thanks to those who contributed to this bugfix release:

- `CaselIT <https://github.com/CaselIT>`__
- `kgriffs <https://github.com/kgriffs>`__
- `liborjelinek <https://github.com/liborjelinek>`__
- `vytas7 <https://github.com/vytas7>`__
