Changelog for Falcon 4.0.0
==========================

Summary
-------

The second beta release of Falcon 4.0.0 is here!

Falcon 4.0 is now feature-complete, and we would really be thankful if you
could test this beta release with your apps, and
:ref:`let us know if you run into any issues <chat>`!
Please also check the list of **breaking changes** below.

If you make use of type annotations in your Falcon app, please run your type
checker of choice without any *typeshed* extensions for Falcon, and
:ref:`report back to us <chat>` how it went!

As always, you can grab the new release
`from PyPI <https://pypi.org/project/falcon/4.0.0b2/>`__::

    pip install falcon==4.0.0b2

(Alternatively, continue reading these docs for more
:ref:`installation options <install>`.)

This release would have not been possible without contributions from the
fantastic group of 30 community members and maintainers.

Thank You!


Changes to Supported Platforms
------------------------------

- CPython 3.11 is now fully supported.
  (`#2072 <https://github.com/falconry/falcon/issues/2072>`__)
- CPython 3.12 is now fully supported.
  (`#2196 <https://github.com/falconry/falcon/issues/2196>`__)
- CPython 3.13 is now fully supported.
  (`#2258 <https://github.com/falconry/falcon/issues/2258>`__)
- End-of-life Python 3.5, 3.6 & 3.7 are no longer supported.
  (`#2074 <https://github.com/falconry/falcon/pull/2074>`__,
  `#2273 <https://github.com/falconry/falcon/pull/2273>`__)
- End-of-life Python 3.8 is no longer actively supported, but
  the framework should still continue to install from source and function.
- The Falcon 4.x series is guaranteed to support CPython 3.10 and
  PyPy3.10 (v7.3.16).
  This means that we may drop the support for Python 3.8 & 3.9 altogether in a
  later 4.x release, especially if we are faced with incompatible ecosystem
  changes in typing, Cython, etc.

Typing support
--------------

Type checking support was introduced in version 4.0. While most of the library is
now typed, further type annotations may be added throughout the 4.x release cycle.
To improve them, we may introduce changes to the typing that do not affect
runtime behavior, but may surface new or different errors with type checkers.

.. role:: python(code)
    :language: python

.. note::
    All undocumented type aliases coming from ``falcon._typing`` are considered
    private to the framework itself, and not meant for annotating applications
    using Falcon. To that end, it is advisable to only use classes from the
    public interface, and public aliases from :mod:`falcon.typing`, e.g.:

    .. code-block:: python

        class MyResource:
            def on_get(self, req: falcon.Request, resp: falcon.Response) -> None:
                resp.media = {'message': 'Hello, World!'}

    If you still decide to reuse the private aliases anyway, they should
    preferably be imported inside :python:`if TYPE_CHECKING:` blocks in order
    to avoid possible runtime errors after an update.
    Also, make sure to :ref:`let us know <chat>` which essential aliases are
    missing from the public interface!

Breaking Changes
----------------

- Falcon is no longer vendoring the
  `python-mimeparse <https://github.com/falconry/python-mimeparse>`__ library;
  the relevant functionality has instead been reimplemented in the framework
  itself, fixing a handful of long-standing bugs in the new implementation.

  If you use standalone
  `python-mimeparse <https://github.com/falconry/python-mimeparse>`__ in your
  project, do not worry! We will continue to maintain it as a separate package
  under the Falconry umbrella (we took over about 3 years ago).

  The following new behaviors are considered breaking changes:

  * Previously, the iterable passed to
    :meth:`req.client_prefers <falcon.Request.client_prefers>` had to be sorted in
    the order of increasing desirability.
    :func:`~falcon.mediatypes.best_match`, and by proxy
    :meth:`~falcon.Request.client_prefers`, now consider the provided media types
    to be sorted in the (more intuitive, we hope) order of decreasing
    desirability.

  * Unlike ``python-mimeparse``, the new
    :ref:`media type utilities <mediatype_util>` consider media types with
    different values for the same parameters as non-matching.

    One theoretically possible scenario where this change can affect you is only
    installing a :ref:`media <media>` handler for a content type with parameters;
    it then may not match media types with conflicting values (that used to match
    before Falcon 4.0).
    If this turns out to be the case, also
    :ref:`install the same handler <custom_media_handlers>` for the generic
    ``type/subtype`` without parameters.

  The new functions,
  :func:`falcon.mediatypes.quality` and :func:`falcon.mediatypes.best_match`,
  otherwise have the same signature as the corresponding methods from
  ``python-mimeparse``. (`#864 <https://github.com/falconry/falcon/issues/864>`__)
- A number of undocumented internal helpers were renamed to start with an
  underscore, indicating they are private methods intended to be used only by the
  framework itself:

  * ``falcon.request_helpers.header_property`` →
    ``falcon.request_helpers._header_property``
  * ``falcon.request_helpers.parse_cookie_header`` →
    ``falcon.request_helpers._parse_cookie_header``
  * ``falcon.response_helpers.format_content_disposition`` →
    ``falcon.response_helpers._format_content_disposition``
  * ``falcon.response_helpers.format_etag_header`` →
    ``falcon.response_helpers._format_etag_header``
  * ``falcon.response_helpers.format_header_value_list`` →
    ``falcon.response_helpers._format_header_value_list``
  * ``falcon.response_helpers.format_range`` →
    ``falcon.response_helpers._format_range``
  * ``falcon.response_helpers.header_property`` →
    ``falcon.response_helpers._header_property``
  * ``falcon.response_helpers.is_ascii_encodable`` →
    ``falcon.response_helpers._is_ascii_encodable``

  If you were relying on these internal helpers, you can either copy the
  implementation into your codebase, or switch to the underscored variants.
  (Needless to say, though, we strongly recommend against referencing private
  methods, as we provide no SemVer guarantees for them.) (`#1457 <https://github.com/falconry/falcon/issues/1457>`__)
- A number of previously deprecated methods, attributes and classes have now been
  removed:

  * In Falcon 3.0, the use of positional arguments was deprecated for the
    optional initializer parameters of :class:`falcon.HTTPError` and its
    subclasses.

    We have now redefined these optional arguments as keyword-only, so passing
    them as positional arguments will result in a :class:`TypeError`:

    >>> import falcon
    >>> falcon.HTTPForbidden('AccessDenied')
    Traceback (most recent call last):
      <...>
    TypeError: HTTPForbidden.__init__() takes 1 positional argument but 2 were given
    >>> falcon.HTTPForbidden('AccessDenied', 'No write access')
    Traceback (most recent call last):
      <...>
    TypeError: HTTPForbidden.__init__() takes 1 positional argument but 3 were given

    Instead, simply pass these parameters as keyword arguments:

    >>> import falcon
    >>> falcon.HTTPForbidden(title='AccessDenied')
    <HTTPForbidden: 403 Forbidden>
    >>> falcon.HTTPForbidden(title='AccessDenied', description='No write access')
    <HTTPForbidden: 403 Forbidden>

  * The ``falcon-print-routes`` command-line utility is no longer supported;
    ``falcon-inspect-app`` is a direct replacement.

  * :class:`falcon.stream.BoundedStream` is no longer re-imported via
    ``falcon.request_helpers``.
    If needed, import it directly as :class:`falcon.stream.BoundedStream`.

  * A deprecated alias of :class:`falcon.stream.BoundedStream`,
    ``falcon.stream.Body``, was removed. Use :class:`falcon.stream.BoundedStream`
    instead.

  * A deprecated utility function, ``falcon.get_http_status()``, was removed.
    Please use :meth:`falcon.code_to_http_status` instead.

  * A deprecated routing utility, ``compile_uri_template()``, was removed.
    This function was only employed in the early versions of the framework, and
    is expected to have been fully supplanted by the
    :class:`~falcon.routing.CompiledRouter`. In a pinch, you can simply copy its
    implementation from the Falcon 3.x source tree into your application.

  * The deprecated ``Response.add_link()`` method was removed; please use
    :meth:`Response.append_link <falcon.Response.append_link>` instead.

  * The deprecated ``has_representation()`` method for :class:`~falcon.HTTPError`
    was removed, along with the ``NoRepresentation`` and
    ``OptionalRepresentation`` classes.

  * An undocumented, deprecated public method ``find_by_media_type()`` of
    :class:`media.Handlers <falcon.media.Handlers>` was removed.
    Apart from configuring handlers for Internet media types, the rest of
    :class:`~falcon.media.Handlers` is only meant to be used internally by the
    framework (unless documented otherwise).

  * Previously, the ``json`` module could be imported via ``falcon.util``.
    This deprecated alias was removed; please import ``json`` directly from the
    :mod:`standard library <json>`, or another third-party JSON library of
    choice.

  We decided, on the other hand, to keep the deprecated :class:`falcon.API` alias
  until Falcon 5.0. (`#1853 <https://github.com/falconry/falcon/issues/1853>`__)
- Previously, it was possible to create an :class:`~falcon.App` with the
  ``cors_enable`` option, and add additional :class:`~falcon.CORSMiddleware`,
  leading to unexpected behavior and dysfunctional CORS. This combination now
  explicitly results in a :class:`ValueError`. (`#1977 <https://github.com/falconry/falcon/issues/1977>`__)
- The default value of the ``csv`` parameter in
  :func:`~falcon.uri.parse_query_string` was changed to ``False``, matching the
  default behavior of other parts of the framework (such as
  :attr:`req.params <falcon.Request.params>`, the test client, etc).
  If the old behavior fits your use case better, pass the ``csv=True`` keyword
  argument explicitly. (`#1999 <https://github.com/falconry/falcon/issues/1999>`__)
- The deprecated ``api_helpers`` was removed in favor of the ``app_helpers``
  module. In addition, the deprecated ``body`` attributes of the
  :class:`~falcon.Response`, :class:`asgi.Response <falcon.asgi.Response>`, and
  :class:`~falcon.HTTPStatus` classes were removed. (`#2090 <https://github.com/falconry/falcon/issues/2090>`__)
- The function :func:`falcon.http_date_to_dt` now validates HTTP dates to have
  the correct timezone set. It now also returns timezone-aware
  :class:`~datetime.datetime` objects. (`#2182 <https://github.com/falconry/falcon/issues/2182>`__)
- ``setup.cfg`` was dropped in favor of consolidating all static project
  configuration in ``pyproject.toml`` (``setup.py`` is still needed for
  programmatic control of the build process). While this change should not impact
  the framework's end-users directly, some ``setuptools``\-based legacy workflows
  (such as the obsolete ``setup.py test``) will no longer work. (`#2314 <https://github.com/falconry/falcon/issues/2314>`__)
- The ``is_async`` keyword argument was removed from
  :meth:`~falcon.media.validators.jsonschema.validate`, as well as the hooks
  :meth:`~falcon.before` and :meth:`~falcon.after`, since it represented a niche
  use case that is even less relevant with the recent advances in the ecosystem:
  Cython 3.0+ will now correctly mark cythonized ``async def`` functions as
  coroutines, and pure-Python factory functions that return a coroutine can now
  be marked as such using :func:`inspect.markcoroutinefunction`
  (Python 3.12+ is required). (`#2343 <https://github.com/falconry/falcon/issues/2343>`__)


New & Improved
--------------

- A new keyword argument, `link_extension`, was added to
  :meth:`falcon.Response.append_link` as specified in
  `RFC 8288, Section 3.4.2
  <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8288#section-3.4.2>`__. (`#228 <https://github.com/falconry/falcon/issues/228>`__)
- A new ``path`` :class:`converter <falcon.routing.PathConverter>`
  capable of matching segments that include ``/`` was added. (`#648 <https://github.com/falconry/falcon/issues/648>`__)
- The new implementation of :ref:`media type utilities <mediatype_util>`
  (Falcon was using the ``python-mimeparse`` library before) now always favors
  the exact media type match, if one is available. (`#1367 <https://github.com/falconry/falcon/issues/1367>`__)
- Type annotations have been added to Falcon's public interface to the package
  itself in order to better support `Mypy <https://www.mypy-lang.org/>`__
  (or other type checkers) users without having to install any third-party
  typeshed packages. (`#1947 <https://github.com/falconry/falcon/issues/1947>`__)
- Similar to the existing :class:`~falcon.routing.IntConverter`, a new
  :class:`~falcon.routing.FloatConverter` has been added, allowing to convert
  path segments to ``float``. (`#2022 <https://github.com/falconry/falcon/issues/2022>`__)
- The default error serializer will now use the response media handlers
  to better negotiate the response content type with the client.
  The implementation still defaults to JSON if the client does not indicate any
  preference. (`#2023 <https://github.com/falconry/falcon/issues/2023>`__)
- :class:`~falcon.asgi.WebSocket` now supports providing a reason for closing the
  socket, either directly via :meth:`~falcon.asgi.WebSocket.close` or by
  configuring :attr:`~falcon.asgi.WebSocketOptions.default_close_reasons`. (`#2025 <https://github.com/falconry/falcon/issues/2025>`__)
- An informative representation was added to :class:`testing.Result <falcon.testing.Result>`
  for easier development and interpretation of failed tests. The form of ``__repr__`` is as follows:
  ``Result<{status_code} {content-type header} {content}>``, where the content part will reflect
  up to 40 bytes of the result's content. (`#2044 <https://github.com/falconry/falcon/issues/2044>`__)
- A new method :meth:`falcon.Request.get_header_as_int` was implemented. (`#2060 <https://github.com/falconry/falcon/issues/2060>`__)
- A new property, :attr:`~falcon.Request.headers_lower`, was added to provide a
  unified, self-documenting way to get a copy of all request headers with
  lowercase names to facilitate case-insensitive matching. This is especially
  useful for middleware components that need to be compatible with both WSGI and
  ASGI. :attr:`~falcon.Request.headers_lower` was added in lieu of introducing a
  breaking change to the WSGI :attr:`~falcon.Request.headers` property that
  returns uppercase header names from the WSGI ``environ`` dictionary. (`#2063 <https://github.com/falconry/falcon/issues/2063>`__)
- In Python 3.13, the ``cgi`` module is removed entirely from the stdlib,
  including its ``parse_header()`` method. Falcon addresses the issue by shipping
  an own implementation; :func:`falcon.parse_header` can also be used in your projects
  affected by the removal. (`#2066 <https://github.com/falconry/falcon/issues/2066>`__)
- A new ``status_code`` attribute was added to the :attr:`falcon.Response <falcon.Response.status_code>`,
  :attr:`falcon.asgi.Response <falcon.Response.status_code>`,
  :attr:`HTTPStatus <falcon.HTTPStatus.status_code>`,
  and :attr:`HTTPError <falcon.HTTPError.status_code>` classes. (`#2108 <https://github.com/falconry/falcon/issues/2108>`__)
- Following the recommendation from
  `RFC 9239 <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9239>`__, the
  :ref:`MEDIA_JS <media_type_constants>` constant has been updated to
  ``text/javascript``. Furthermore, this and other media type constants are now
  preferred to the stdlib's :mod:`mimetypes` for the initialization of
  :attr:`~falcon.ResponseOptions.static_media_types`. (`#2110 <https://github.com/falconry/falcon/issues/2110>`__)
- A new keyword argument, `samesite`, was added to
  :meth:`~falcon.Response.unset_cookie` that allows to override the default
  ``Lax`` setting of `SameSite` on the unset cookie. (`#2124 <https://github.com/falconry/falcon/issues/2124>`__)
- A new keyword argument, `partitioned`, was added to
  :meth:`~falcon.Response.set_cookie` to opt a cookie into partitioned storage,
  with a separate cookie jar per each top-level site.
  (See also
  `CHIPS <https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Privacy/Privacy_sandbox/Partitioned_cookies>`__
  for a more detailed description of this web technology.) (`#2213 <https://github.com/falconry/falcon/issues/2213>`__)
- The class ``falcon.HTTPPayloadTooLarge`` was renamed to
  :class:`falcon.HTTPContentTooLarge`, together with the accompanying HTTP
  :ref:`status code <status>` update, in order to reflect the newest HTTP
  semantics as per
  `RFC 9110, Section 15.5.14 <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9110#status.413>`__.
  (The old class name remains available as a deprecated compatibility alias.)

  In addition, one new :ref:`status code constant <status>` was added:
  ``falcon.HTTP_421`` (also available as ``falcon.HTTP_MISDIRECTED_REQUEST``)
  in accordance with
  `RFC 9110, Section 15.5.20 <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9110#status.421>`__. (`#2276 <https://github.com/falconry/falcon/issues/2276>`__)
- The :class:`~falcon.CORSMiddleware` now properly handles the missing ``Allow``
  header case, by denying the preflight CORS request.
  The static file route has been updated to properly support CORS preflight,
  by allowing ``GET`` requests. (`#2325 <https://github.com/falconry/falcon/issues/2325>`__)
- Added :attr:`falcon.testing.Result.content_type` and
  :attr:`falcon.testing.StreamedResult.content_type` as a utility accessor
  for the ``Content-Type`` header. (`#2349 <https://github.com/falconry/falcon/issues/2349>`__)
- A new flag, :attr:`~falcon.ResponseOptions.xml_error_serialization`, has been
  added to :attr:`~falcon.ResponseOptions` that can be used to disable automatic
  XML serialization of :class:`~falcon.HTTPError` when using the default error
  serializer (and the client prefers it).

  This new flag currently defaults to ``True``, preserving the same behavior as
  the previous Falcon versions. Falcon 5.0 will either change the default to
  ``False``, or remove the automatic XML error serialization altogether.
  If you wish to retain support for XML serialization in the default error
  serializer, you should add a
  :ref:`response media handler for XML <custom_media_handlers>`.

  In accordance with this change, the :meth:`falcon.HTTPError.to_xml` method was
  deprecated. (`#2355 <https://github.com/falconry/falcon/issues/2355>`__)


Fixed
-----

- The web servers used for tests are now run through :any:`sys.executable` in
  order to ensure that they respect the virtualenv in which tests are being run. (`#2047 <https://github.com/falconry/falcon/issues/2047>`__)
- Previously, importing :class:`~falcon.testing.TestCase` as a top-level
  attribute in a test module could make ``pytest`` erroneously attempt to collect
  its methods as test cases. This has now been prevented by adding a ``__test__``
  attribute (set to ``False``) to the :class:`~falcon.testing.TestCase` class. (`#2147 <https://github.com/falconry/falcon/issues/2147>`__)
- Falcon will now raise an instance of
  :class:`~falcon.errors.WebSocketDisconnected` from the :class:`OSError` that
  the ASGI server signals in the case of a disconnected client (as per
  the `ASGI HTTP & WebSocket protocol
  <https://asgi.readthedocs.io/en/latest/specs/www.html#id2>`__ version ``2.4``).
  It is worth noting though that Falcon's
  :ref:`built-in receive buffer <ws_lost_connection>` normally detects the
  ``websocket.disconnect`` event itself prior the potentially failing attempt to
  ``send()``.

  Disabling this built-in receive buffer (by setting
  :attr:`~falcon.asgi.WebSocketOptions.max_receive_queue` to ``0``) was also
  found to interfere with receiving ASGI WebSocket messages in an unexpected
  way. The issue has been fixed so that setting this option to ``0`` now properly
  bypasses the buffer altogether, and extensive test coverage has been added for
  validating this scenario. (`#2292 <https://github.com/falconry/falcon/issues/2292>`__)
- Customizing
  :attr:`MultipartParseOptions.media_handlers
  <falcon.media.multipart.MultipartParseOptions.media_handlers>` could previously
  lead to unintentionally modifying a shared class variable.
  This has been fixed, and the
  :attr:`~falcon.media.multipart.MultipartParseOptions.media_handlers` attribute
  is now initialized to a fresh copy of handlers for every instance of
  :class:`~falcon.media.multipart.MultipartParseOptions`. To that end, a proper
  :meth:`~falcon.media.Handlers.copy` method has been implemented for the media
  :class:`~falcon.media.Handlers` class. (`#2293 <https://github.com/falconry/falcon/issues/2293>`__)


Misc
----

- The :ref:`utility functions <util>` ``create_task()`` and
  ``get_running_loop()`` are now deprecated in favor of their standard library
  counterparts, :func:`asyncio.create_task` and :func:`asyncio.get_running_loop`. (`#2253 <https://github.com/falconry/falcon/issues/2253>`__)
- The :class:`falcon.TimezoneGMT` class was deprecated. Use the UTC timezone
  (:attr:`datetime.timezone.utc`) from the standard library instead. (`#2301 <https://github.com/falconry/falcon/issues/2301>`__)



Contributors to this Release
----------------------------

.. note::
    If we missed you below, don’t worry!

    We will refresh the full list of contributors before the 4.0.0 final
    release.

Many thanks to all of our talented and stylish contributors for this release!

- `aarcex3 <https://github.com/aarcex3>`__
- `aryaniyaps <https://github.com/aryaniyaps>`__
- `bssyousefi <https://github.com/bssyousefi>`__
- `CaselIT <https://github.com/CaselIT>`__
- `cclauss <https://github.com/cclauss>`__
- `chgad <https://github.com/chgad>`__
- `copalco <https://github.com/copalco>`__
- `davetapley <https://github.com/davetapley>`__
- `derkweijers <https://github.com/derkweijers>`__
- `e-io <https://github.com/e-io>`__
- `euj1n0ng <https://github.com/euj1n0ng>`__
- `jkapica <https://github.com/jkapica>`__
- `jkklapp <https://github.com/jkklapp>`__
- `john-g-g <https://github.com/john-g-g>`__
- `kaichan1201 <https://github.com/kaichan1201>`__
- `kentbull <https://github.com/kentbull>`__
- `kgriffs <https://github.com/kgriffs>`__
- `M-Mueller <https://github.com/M-Mueller>`__
- `meetshah133 <https://github.com/meetshah133>`__
- `mgorny <https://github.com/mgorny>`__
- `mihaitodor <https://github.com/mihaitodor>`__
- `MRLab12 <https://github.com/MRLab12>`__
- `myusko <https://github.com/myusko>`__
- `nfsec <https://github.com/nfsec>`__
- `prathik2401 <https://github.com/prathik2401>`__
- `RioAtHome <https://github.com/RioAtHome>`__
- `TigreModerata <https://github.com/TigreModerata>`__
- `vgerak <https://github.com/vgerak>`__
- `vytas7 <https://github.com/vytas7>`__
- `wendy5667 <https://github.com/wendy5667>`__
