Changelog for Falcon 0.2.0
==========================

New
---

-  Since 0.1 we've added proper RTD docs to make it easier for everyone
   to get started with the framework. Over time we will continue adding
   content, and we would love your help!
-  Falcon now supports "wsgi.filewrapper". You can assign any file-like
   object to resp.stream and Falcon will use "wsgi.filewrapper" to more
   efficiently pipe the data to the WSGI server.
-  Support was added for automatically parsing requests containing
   "application/x-www-form-urlencoded" content. Form fields are now
   folded into req.params.
-  Custom Request and Response classes are now supported. You can
   specify custom types when instantiating falcon.API.
-  A new middleware feature was added to the framework. Middleware
   deprecates global hooks, and we encourage everyone to migrate as soon
   as possible.
-  A general-purpose dict attribute was added to Request. Middleware,
   hooks, and responders can now use req.context to share contextual
   information about the current request.
-  A new method, append\_header, was added to falcon.API to allow
   setting multiple values for the same header using comma separation.
   Note that this will not work for setting cookies, but we plan to
   address this in the next release (0.3).
-  A new "resource" attribute was added to hooks. Old hooks that do not
   accept this new attribute are shimmed so that they will continue to
   function. While we have worked hard to minimize the performance
   impact, we recommend migrating to the new function signature to avoid
   any overhead.
-  Error response bodies now support XML in addition to JSON. In
   addition, the HTTPError serialization code was refactored to make it
   easier to implement a custom error serializer.
-  A new method, "set\_error\_serializer" was added to falcon.API. You
   can use this method to override Falcon's default HTTPError serializer
   if you need to support custom media types.
-  Falcon's testing base class, testing.TestBase was improved to
   facilitate Py3k testing. Notably, TestBase.simulate\_request now
   takes an additional "decode" kwarg that can be used to automatically
   decode byte-string PEP-3333 response bodies.
-  An "add\_link" method was added to the Response class. Apps can use
   this method to add one or more Link header values to a response.
-  Added two new properties, req.host and req.subdomain, to make it
   easier to get at the hostname info in the request.
-  Allow a wider variety of characters to be used in query string
   params.
-  Internal APIs have been refactored to allow overriding the default
   routing mechanism. Further modularization is planned for the next
   release (0.3).
-  Changed req.get\_param so that it behaves the same whether a list was
   specified in the query string using the HTML form style (in which
   each element is listed in a separate 'key=val' field) or in the more
   compact API style (in which each element is comma-separated and
   assigned to a single param instance, as in 'key=val1,val2,val3')
-  Added a convenience method, set\_stream(...), to the Response class
   for setting the stream and its length at the same time, which should
   help people not forget to set both (and save a few keystrokes along
   the way).
-  Added several new error classes, including HTTPRequestEntityTooLarge,
   HTTPInvalidParam, HTTPMissingParam, HTTPInvalidHeader and
   HTTPMissingHeader.
-  Python 3.4 is now fully supported.
-  Various minor performance improvements

Breaking Changes
----------------

-  The deprecated util.misc.percent\_escape and
   util.misc.percent\_unescape functions were removed. Please use the
   functions in the util.uri module instead.
-  The deprecated function, API.set\_default\_route, was removed. Please
   use sinks instead.
-  HTTPRangeNotSatisfiable no longer accepts a media\_type parameter.
-  When using the comma-delimited list convention,
   req.get\_param\_as\_list(...) will no longer insert placeholders,
   using the None type, for empty elements. For example, where
   previously the query string "foo=1,,3" would result in ['1', None,
   '3'], it will now result in ['1', '3'].

Fixed
-----

-  Ensure 100% test coverage and fix any bugs identified in the process.
-  Fix not recognizing the "bytes=" prefix in Range headers.
-  Make HTTPNotFound and HTTPMethodNotAllowed fully compliant, according
   to RFC 7231.
-  Fixed the default on\_options responder causing a Cython type error.
-  URI template strings can now be of type unicode under Python 2.
-  When SCRIPT\_NAME is not present in the WSGI environ, return an empty
   string for the req.app property.
-  Global "after" hooks will now be executed even when a responder
   raises an error.
-  Fixed several minor issues regarding testing.create\_environ(...)
-  Work around a wsgiref quirk, where if no content-length header is
   submitted by the client, wsgiref will set the value of that header to
   an empty string in the WSGI environ.
-  Resolved an issue causing several source files to not be Cythonized.
-  Docstrings have been edited for clarity and correctness.